---
layout: post
title:  ROS SERIES 2
category: jekyll 
description: Publisher and Subscriber Part1
---

## Publisher and Subscriber : Part I

Nodes in ROS are executables which work on data. But you probably want these nodes to exchange information with each other otherwise you would not be learning ROS . One way you can do it is by using Publishers and Subscribers.**Publisher** send processed data from node to a common data pool called topic whereas **Subscriber** pull that data out of it for its own usage. 
Single package can contain multiple nodes and single node can have multiple publishers and subscribers (as it will be shown more in detail in later tutorials)

Packages are in simple terms a way to lump of multiple nodes (pieces) together. One can say that packages perform task while nodes perform subtasks. However, it is also quite common for a package to have a single node .

Before creating node first we have to create package within which node will reside. (each node has to belong to a package)

1. Go to src folder inside your workspace

2. Open terminal and enter following 

   ```bash
   catkin_create_pkg package_one std_msgs rospy roscpp
   ```

Last three statements are dependencies your package will depend on. In our code will use python,c++ and standard ROS messages  so we list them as our dependencies.

Now go inside src folder of your package folder (package_one) and create new cpp file. I will call it node_one.

Here is the code :

## C++

```c++
// node_one.cpp
#include "ros/ros.h"
#include "std_msgs/String.h"
#include <iostream>
int main(int argc, char **argv)
{
ros::init(argc, argv, "node_one");
ros::NodeHandle nh;
ros::Publisher publisher = nh.advertise<std_msgs::String>("topic_one", 1000);
ros::Rate loop_rate(5);

while (ros::ok())
{
std_msgs::String message;
std::string data = "This message has been sent from node_one using publisher" ;
message.data = data;
ROS_INFO("%s", message.data.c_str());
publisher.publish(message);
ros::spinOnce();
loop_rate.sleep();
}
return 0;
}

```

In first two lines we have to include ROS itself,standart messages (std_msgs) library which comes preinstalled with ROS and iostream which will be required.

Next four lines setup the node and topic it will publish data to.
Some explanations given below:
```
ros::init --  gives the name for node
ros::NodeHandle - actually here we initialize node and create handle to work on it
ros::Publisher creates publisher object called publisher which will be used to publish our message to topic_one
ros::Rate loop_rate() - sets up frequency in Hz for ros node update
Code inside curlies will work until ros::ok() gives out false (that is roscore has been shut down).
We create message object of type std_msgs::String and fill it with message which is called data 
publisher.publish(message) will send that message  to the topic_one
Next two lines are used to force ros update itself with frequency defined above.

```

You can create multiple publishers within same node to publish to different topics. (will be shown in third tutorial)

After we have written code we have to make sure that compiler compiles them.

Go to Cmake.txt file on package home directory and add these lines.

```bash
add_executable(doit src/node_one.cpp)
target_link_libraries(doit ${catkin_LIBRARIES})
```

You can call your that node file how you want but I called it doit . We wont be adding  add_dependency generate message as we have not added custom message type (as it is done in official ROS tutorial).

After you havve done all go to anywhere inside your workspace,open terminate and enter catkin build.

After everything is done, you can fire up terminal and run your node:

```bash
roscore  
rosrun package_one doit #on new tab
```

## Python

```python
#!/usr/bin/env python
import rospy
from std_msgs.msg import String

def publish():
    publisher = rospy.Publisher('topic_one', String, queue_size=10)
    rospy.init_node('node_one', anonymous=True)
    rate = rospy.Rate(5) # 5hz
    while not rospy.is_shutdown():
        message= "This message has been sent to topic_one using node_one"
	rospy.loginfo(message)
        publisher.publish(message)
        rate.sleep()

if __name__ == '__main__':
    try:
        publish()
    except rospy.ROSInterruptException:
        pass
```

Codes for python and C++ are quite similar though it is much more compact in python.

First we create Publisher object using rospy.Publisher where we define topic name, message type and queue size.

Just like ros::init here we also initialize node using rospy.init_node;

Again while ros is running we create message and publish it using publisher we created.

After you’ve done all above create directory generally called scripts inside package folder and save this file as node_one.py there. Then go to Cmake file on package directory (you can see how to create one on the top of the page) and add these lines:

```bash
add_executable(doit src/node_one.py)
target_link_libraries(doit ${catkin_LIBRARIES})
```

And open terminal inside any folder within workspace and build workspace using catkin build. To run the package 

```bash
roscore
rosrun package_one doit # on a new tab
```

In the next tutorial I will show how to write subscriber inside ROS
